Jewish story told by Martin Buber (taken from Ratzinger's Introduction to
Christianity):

An adherent of the Enlightenment, a very learned man, who had heard of the
Rabbi of Berditchev, paid a visit to him in order to argue, as was his custom,
with him, too, and to shatter his old-fashioned proofs of the truth of his
faith. When he entered the Rabbi's room, he found him walking up and down with
a book in his hand, rapt in thought. The Rabbi paid no attention to the new
arrival. Suddenly he stopped, looked at him fleetingly, and said, "But perhaps
it is true after all." The scholar tried in vain to collect himself - his knees
trembled, so terrible was the Rabbi to behold and so terrible his simple
utterance to hear. But Rabbi Levi Yitschak now turned to face him and spoke
quite calmly: "My son, the great scholars of the Torah with whom you have
argued wasted their words on you; as you departed you laughed at them. They
were unable to lay God and his Kingdom on the table before you, and neither can
I. But think, my son, perhaps it is true." The exponent of the Enlightenment
opposed him with all his strength; but this terrible "perhaps" that echoed back
at him time after time broke his resistance.

---

Privrzenec osvietenstva, velmi uceny clovek, ktory pocul o rabinovi z
Berdiceva, ho navstivil, aby s nim - ako mal vo zvyku - debatoval a rozbil jeho
staromodne dokazy o pravdivosti viery. Ked vstupil do rabinovej izby, nasiel ho
prechadzat sa s knihou v ruke, ponoreneho v myslienkach. Rabin novoprichodziemu
nevenoval pozornost. Zrazu sa zastavil, letmo na neho pozrel a povedal: „Ale
mozno je to nakoniec pravda.“ Ucenec sa marne snazil pozbierat - kolena sa mu
triasli, tak strasny bol pohlad na rabina a tak strasne bolo pocut jeho
jednoduche vyjadrenie. Rabin Levi Yitschak sa teraz otocil k nemu a celkom
pokojne prehovoril: „Synu, velki ucenci Tory, s ktorymi si debatoval, marnili
na teba svoje slova; ked si odchadzal, smial si sa im. Neboli schopni polozit
Boha a jeho kralovstvo pred teba na stol, a ani ja to nedokazem. Ale premyslaj,
synu, mozno je to pravda.“ Zastanca osvietenstva mu oponoval vsetkou svojou
silou, ale to strasne „mozno“ sa mu stale vracalo a lamalo jeho odpor.
