My notes from the book Five Proofs for the Existence of God by Edward Feser. Chapter 1, Aristotelian Proof.

The Unmoved Mover

*Change* occurs. Coffee in a cup gets cold (qualitative change). Leave falls of the tree (change of location). A puddle grows large as it rains (quantitative change). A fly dies (substantial change).

Does it? I guess you've seen The Matrix (or maybe read Descartes' Meditations). What if our entire life is a dream or hallucination? Well, you would still have one experience or though, then another. That is a kind of change.

Parmenides argued that change is illusion, it can't exist. Take for example that coffee (this is going to be our favorite example). Coldness of the coffee does not exist when coffee is hot. Then it comes to existence. But something can't come from nothing.

Aristotle agrees that something can't come of nothing. But he says the coldness of the coffee is not nothing. It's not actually present but it's present potentially in a way other qualities are not. For example a coffee has no potential to become fuel for a gasoline engine. So change exists and can be described as *actualization of potential*.

How does a change happen? By mere observation we can see there's always something that brings it about. It's not the coffee that makes itself cold. It's the surrounding air or maybe ice cubes. It also follows from what a change is: the actualization of a potential. Potential coldness can hardly do anything, only what is actual can.

So some potentials are actualized, and when they are, there must be something already actual which actualizes them. And sometimes when a potential is being actualized, what actualizes it is itself something which has gone from potential to actual. So we have a series of changers and things changed. The coldness of the coffee was caused by the coolness of the air, the air was cooled by the air conditioner, the air conditioner was turned on by you. This series of changes typically extend backward in time in a *linear* fashion. It can in theory extend backward to infinity.

There's another kind of series, let's call it *hierarchical*, which must have a first member. Think of something existing in a single moment (this is not essential but useful to introduce the idea): a cup of coffee on a table. Wait but this is not a change! Well, we agreed that change is actualization of a potential. In this case the potential of the cup to be three feet off the ground. This potential is actualized by a desk. The potential of the desk to hold cup aloft is actualized by the floor. We could go on. The point is that there is dependency of later members on the earlier ones. If you remove one element from this series the whole series seizes to exist. The desk will hold the cup aloft only so long as it is itself being help up by the floor. The members of a linear series are not like that. The air conditioner will keep cooling the room even if you left the house or dropped dead. The members of the linear series, once actualized, have their own causal power.

The hierarchical series of causes must have a *first member* while linear does not. Since the desk, the floor, etc. have no power of their own to hold the cup aloft, the series could not exist in the first place unless there were something that did have the power to hold up these intermediaries without having to be held up itself. There has to be a first cause. First not in a temporal sense but in the sense that it has inherent or built-in causal power. Every cause in hierarchical series other than the first has its causal power only in a derivative way.

Now, a coffee can get cold, or be held up by a desk, only if it exists. Why does the coffee exist, what keeps it in *existence*? To simplify let's think about the water that makes up the bulk of coffee. Given the chemistry of water, it also has the potential to exist as distinct quantities of hydrogen and oxygen. But this potential is not being actualized right now. Why? Explaining past or future chemical processes is no good because we are asking what keeps the water in existence at any instant. Explaining chemical bonding between atoms or appealing to the structure of the atom won't answer the question either.

What we have here is something like the cup which is held up by the desk. But in this case the very existence of a thing is at issue rather than merely its particular location. The potential of the coffee to exist is actualized, in part, by the existence of the water, which in turn exists only because a certain potential of the atoms is being actualized, where these atoms themselves exist only because a certain potential of the subatomic particles is being actualized. This is a hierarchical series, one which, as we have seen, must have a first member. It this case the first cause is something that can actualize the potential of other things to exist without having to have its own existence actualized by anything. This first member doesn't have any potential for existence that needs to be actualized, it's just actual. It doesn't *have* actuality like things it actualizes do but it *is* actuality itself. It has also been called uncaused cause, Unmoved Mover (Aristotle) or unactualized actualizer.
